Zomes page (#511)
holochain/docs-pages: src/pages/build/zomes.md

---
title: "Zomes"
---

::: intro
A **zome** (short for chromosome) is a module of executable code within a [**DNA**](/resources/glossary/#dna). It's the smallest unit of modularity in a Holochain application.
:::

## How a zome is structured

> A zome is just a [WebAssembly module](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/syntax/modules.html) that exposes public functions. The **conductor** (the Holochain runtime) knows about these functions and calls them at different points in the application's lifetime. Some functions have special names and are called **lifecycle callbacks**<!-- TODO uncomment when lifecycle callbacks PR is merged [lifecycle callbacks](/build/lifecycle-events-and-callbacks/)-->, and you can also define arbitrarily named functions of your own to serve as your zome's API.

Reviewer: It discovers the functions rather than knowing about them. That's really only for callbacks though I think and it's up to the end user to know about zome function names to be able to call them

Reviewer: For "lifecycle callbacks", that only covers things like `init` and migration hooks etc. Things like `validate` and `post_commit` are event driven but not by the lifecycle of the app. I'd prefer to just call them "callbacks" and optionally define "lifecycle hooks" to cover a class of callbacks

> For Rust developers, we've created an SDK called the [Holochain Development Kit (HDK)](https://crates.io/crates/hdk/). It lets you define functions, exchange data with the host (the Holochain VM), and access all of the host's functionality.

Reviewer 2: This feels too confusing here and out of context, I suggest just deleting it, or somehow relating it zomes.  i.e. it's not actually part of "how a zome is structured" it's info about writing zome code.

Author: I created a new section for it that gives the (somewhat missing) piece of informtaion that a zome is just a library crate. (In practice anyway)

> For Rust developers, we've created an SDK called the [Holochain Development Kit (HDK)](https://crates.io/crates/hdk/). It lets you define functions, exchange data with the host (the Holochain VM), and access all of the host's functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Rust developers, we've created an SDK called the [Holochain Development Kit (HDK)](https://crates.io/crates/hdk/). It lets you define functions, exchange data with the host (the Holochain runtime), and access all of the host's functionality.
```

## The two types of zomes

### Integrity

An **integrity zome** defines a portion of your application's data model or schema. This includes not just the structure of the data but also _validation rules for operations that manipulate this data_.

!!! info Keep your integrity zomes small

> While you can define arbitrary public zome functions in your integrity zome, in practice it makes fixing bugs and adding features difficult, because every code change to an integrity zome [modifies the hash of the DNA](/build/application-structure/#dna) and causes a fork of the database. So it's better for maintainability if the integrity zome _only_ contains your data model and the necessary callbacks that inform Holochain about that model.

Reviewer 2: Can we reverse this?  I.e. instead of telling people what they could possibly do up front, tell them what they should do, and then you might have a caveat about what they could do if they have to for example:

```
Your integrity zome should only contain your data model and the necessary callbacks that inform Holochain about that model.  Although you can define arbitrary public zome functions in your integrity zome, in practice it makes fixing bugs and adding features difficult, because every code change to an integrity zome [modifies the hash of the DNA](http://localhost:8080/build/application-structure/#dna) and causes a network fork.
```

> While you can define arbitrary public zome functions in your integrity zome, in practice it makes fixing bugs and adding features difficult, because every code change to an integrity zome [modifies the hash of the DNA](/build/application-structure/#dna) and causes a fork of the database. So it's better for maintainability if the integrity zome _only_ contains your data model and the necessary callbacks that inform Holochain about that model.

Reviewer: Solid advice, objecting again to "fork", we have no mechanism to fork and we're mostly thinking about migration.

Sure you could use a migration to use a "fork" but it's not the thing we're focused on enabling with allowing people to update integrity code

Author: I'd love a better word -- any ideas? We've used 'fork' forever to describe creating a new network space w/o carrying part of the old data and peer topology with it, but I can see how it could imply those things. I grant that 'fork' does suggest a contiguous history that splits in two.

> Because these callbacks only need a small portion of Holochain's functionality, you don't need the entire `hdk` crate to write an integrity zome. Use the smaller [`hdi`](https://crates.io/crates/hdi) crate instead.

Reviewer: This should be elevated. I think let's not confuse things by letting people know that it's possible to use the HDK in an integrity zome, let's just stick with saying that the HDI is for integrity zomes.

If you call HDK functions in a validation context, it will just fail. 

The reason for having them separate isn't as simple as size, it's about stability guarantees. For the same reason that you don't want to be updating your zome code too often like you've discussed above, you don't want to be forced to upgrade to a new HDK as that changes. The intention is to make changes to the HDI really rarely as Holochain becomes stable.

Author: oh good point about fewer upstream changes.

!!!

<!-- TODO: placeholder to ask the question, should we mention the pattern of defining all your types in a separate crate so the coordinator can import the types without having to import the validation callback etc? is that possible? how does it work? -->

Your integrity zome tells Holochain about the types of [entries](/build/entries/) and [links](/build/links-paths-and-anchors/) it defines with macros called [`hdk_entry_types`](https://docs.rs/hdi/latest/hdi/attr.hdk_entry_types.html) and [`hdk_link_types`](https://docs.rs/hdi/latest/hdi/attr.hdk_link_types.html) added to enums of all the entry and link types. These create lifecycle callbacks that are run at DNA install time and give Holochain the info it needs. Read more in [Define an entry type](/build/entries/#define-an-entry-type) and [Define a link type](/build/links-paths-and-anchors/#define-a-link-type).

> Finally, your integrity zome defines validation callbacks <!-- TODO: uncomment once lifecycle events PR is merged [validation callbacks](/build/lifecycle-events-and-callbacks/#define-a-validate-callback)--> that check for correctness of data and actions. Holochain runs this on an agent's own device when they attempt to author data, and on other peers' devices when they're asked to store and serve data authored by others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, your integrity zome defines validation callbacks <!-- TODO: uncomment once lifecycle events PR is merged [validation callbacks](/build/lifecycle-events-and-callbacks/#define-a-validate-callback)--> that check for correctness of data and actions. Holochain runs this on an agent's own device when they attempt to author data, and when they're asked to store and serve data authored by others.
```

#### Create an integrity zome

**The easy way to create an integrity zome** is to [scaffold a new hApp](/get-started/3-forum-app-tutorial/). The scaffolding tool will generate all the project files, including scripts to test and build distributable packages, and it can also scaffold boilerplate code for all your app's required callbacks and data types.

> If you want to start from scratch, first make sure you have Rust, Cargo, and the `wasm32-unknown-unknown` Rust toolchain installed on your computer. Then create a library crate:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to start from scratch without the scaffolding, first make sure you have Rust, Cargo, and the `wasm32-unknown-unknown` Rust toolchain installed on your computer. Then create a library crate:
```

> If you want to start from scratch, first make sure you have Rust, Cargo, and the `wasm32-unknown-unknown` Rust toolchain installed on your computer. Then create a library crate:

Reviewer: `wasm32-unknown-unknown` is a compiler target, not a toolchain -> https://github.com/holochain/holochain/blob/develop/rust-toolchain.toml

It's either added with a `rust-toolchain.toml` or with `rustup target add wasm32-unknown-unknown`

```bash
cargo new my_integrity_zome --lib
```

Then add some necessary dependencies to your new `Cargo.toml` file:

```diff:toml
 [dependencies]
+hdi = "=0.5.0-rc.1"
+serde = "1.0"
```

> At the very minimum, make sure your code exposes a `validate` callback <!-- TODO: uncomment once lifecycle events PR is merged [`validate` callback](/build/lifecycle-events-and-callbacks/#define-a-validate-callback)--> and [defines some entry types](/build/entries/#define-an-entry-type).

Reviewer: Is that required? I don't think it is, I think it's optional to define either types or a validate callback. Your zome isn't very useful without one or the other. I'd soften the wording here though

```suggestion
At this point your can define a `validate` callback <!-- TODO: uncomment once lifecycle events PR is merged [`validate` callback](/build/lifecycle-events-and-callbacks/#define-a-validate-callback)--> and [define some entry types](/build/entries/#define-an-entry-type).
```

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure Holochain lets you define types without a `validate` callback. Maybe we should prevent that, but I'm not aware that we do at the moment.

I think I may have said differently recently, maybe we should check this

Author: okay! noted

Compile your zome using `cargo`:

```bash
cargo build --release --target wasm32-unknown-unknown
```

### Coordinator

Coordinator zomes hold your back-end logic --- the functions that read and write data or communicate with peers. In addition to some optional, specially named lifecycle callbacks <!-- TODO: uncomment once lifecycle events PR is merged [lifecycle callbacks](/build/lifecycle-events-and-callbacks/#coordinator-zomes)-->, you can also write your own **zome functions** that serve as your zome's API.

#### Create a coordinator zome

Again, **the easiest way to create a coordinator zome** is to let the scaffolding tool do it for you. But if you want to do it from scratch, it's the same as an integrity zome, with two exceptions. Your `Cargo.toml`'s dependencies should be modified like this:

```diff:toml
 [dependencies]
-hdi = "=0.5.0-rc.1"
+hdk = "=0.4.0-rc.1"
 serde = "1.0"
```

And there aren't any required callbacks to define in your code.

## Define a function

> The conductor and the zome pass function input and output data to each other by first allocating the data in a piece of memory that they both share, then passing a pointer to the location and size of the data. This is rather complicated, so we've built a macro called [`hdk_extern`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/prelude/attr.hdk_extern.html) that makes it as easy as defining a `pub fn`.

Reviewer: I wonder how much value this is adding to include these details. I think something along the lines of "we've provided a macro to simplify the integration with WASM".

To dip into a level of detail that most Rust programmers will get, you could say something like "it's a bit like the `extern "C"` that you can use to make your Rust code callable from C, here you're making your function callable by Holochain"

Here's a very simple zome function that takes a name and returns a greeting:

```rust
use hdk::prelude::{hdk_extern, ExternResult};

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn say_hello(name: String) -> ExternResult<String> {
    Ok(format!("Hello {}!", name))
}
```

### Handling errors

You can handle most errors in a function with the `?` short-circuit operator; the HDK does a good job of converting `Result:Err` into `ExternResult<T>` and providing the zome name and the line number where the failure happened.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::{hdk_extern, ExternResult};

struct Foo {
    bar: i32;
    baz: String;
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn try_to_deserialize_foo_and_get_baz(bytes: Vec<u8>) -> ExternResult<String> {
    // Short-circuit any deserialization error.
    let deserialized: Foo = bytes.try_into()?;
    Ok(deserialized.baz)
}
```

You can also explicitly return an error with the [`wasm_error`](https://docs.rs/hdi/latest/hdi/prelude/macro.wasm_error.html) macro:

```rust
use hdk::prelude::{hdk_extern, ExternResult, wasm_error};

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn check_age_for_18a_movie(age: u32) -> ExternResult<()> {
    if age >= 18 {

>         Ok(())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return Ok(());
```

Has this code been built? `cargo build` should have picked that up

Author: not yet; I remembered I hadn't done that yet and was considering putting this back into draft mode. Sorry I missed that!
